# Project: Data Pipelines with Apache Airflow

__Data Engineer:__ Lysmar Freitas  


## 1. Introduction

A music streaming company, Sparkify, has decided that it is time to introduce more automation and monitoring to their data warehouse ETL pipelines and come to the conclusion that the best tool to achieve this is Apache Airflow.

They have decided to bring me into the project and expect you to create high grade data pipelines that are dynamic and built from reusable tasks, can be monitored, and allow easy backfills. They have also noted that the data quality plays a big part when analyses are executed on top the data warehouse and want to run tests against their datasets after the ETL steps have been executed to catch any discrepancies in the datasets.

The source data resides in S3 and needs to be processed in Sparkify's data warehouse in Amazon Redshift. The source datasets consist of JSON logs that tell about user activity in the application and JSON metadata about the songs the users listen to.

## 2. Project Description
In this project I will need to create my own custom operators to perform tasks such as staging the data, filling the data warehouse, and running checks on the data as the final step.

## 3. Project Datasets

For this project, I'll be working with two datasets. Here are the s3 links for each:

Log data: s3://udacity-dend/log_data
Song data: s3://udacity-dend/song_data

Log data json path: s3://udacity-dend/log_json_path.json

### 3.1. Song Dataset
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

- song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
- song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}

### 3.2. Log Dataset
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.

The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

- log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
- log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json

And below is an example of what a single log file, 2018-11-13-events.json, looks like.

{"artist":"Pavement", "auth":"Logged In", "firstName":"Sylvie", "gender", "F", "itemInSession":0, "lastName":"Cruz", "length":99.16036, "level":"free", "location":"Klamath Falls, OR", "method":"PUT", "page":"NextSong", "registration":"1.541078e+12", "sessionId":345, "song":"Mercy:The Laundromat", "status":200, "ts":1541990258796, "userAgent":"Mozilla/5.0(Macintosh; Intel Mac OS X 10_9_4...)", "userId":10}


## 4. Project Development
Below are the steps followed to complete this project.

### 4.1 Create Table Schemas

#### 4.1.1 Design schemas for Song Play Analysis
Using the song and event datasets, it was created a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis. This includes the following tables.

##### Fact Table
__songplays -__ records in event data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
- songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent

##### Dimension Tables
__users -__ users in the app
- user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level

__songs -__ songs in music database
- song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration

__artists -__ artists in music database
- artist_id, name, location, lattitude, longitude

__time -__ timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
- start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday


### 4.1.2 Create tables in Redshift using the query editor
To execute the DAG workflow, the tables must be created in Redshift before. One way to do that is using the sql statements found in
create_tables.sql and run them using Redshift query editor.

To use the query editor on the Amazon Redshift console

- Sign in to the AWS Management Console and open the Amazon Redshift console at https://console.aws.amazon.com/redshift/.

- On the navigation menu, choose EDITOR, then connect to a database in your cluster.

- For Schema, choose public to create a new table based on that schema.

- Enter one of the create tables statement, like the following, in the query editor window and choose Run to create a new table.

CREATE TABLE public.artists (  
	artistid varchar(256) NOT NULL,  
	name varchar(256),  
	location varchar(256),  
	lattitude numeric(18,0),  
	longitude numeric(18,0)  
)  

- Choose Clear.

- Repeat the last two steps for other tables statements
